# Stanford CS107 course summary

## Binary data
- Everything is just bits - zeroes and ones
- A char is one byte (8 bits), an int 4 bytes (in most systems), a float 8 bytes, etc.
- Data can be represented with in different notations, e.g. bit notation (base 2, 1 bit), decimal (base 10, human notation), hexadecimal (base 16, 0-9+A-F, 4 bits), ASCII (1 byte, 128 common characters), base64 (base 64, 64 characters, 6 bits), etc.
- Data types such as int, long, double etc. are different in size and can have different bit representations depending on the underlying system. E.g. for integers, big-endian systems places most significant bits first, whereas little-endian systems place them last
- An (unsigned) integer with bit pattern 1100 on a big-endian system represents the decimal number  1 * 2^3 + 1 * 2^2 + 0 * 2^1 + 0 * 2^0 = 12
- The two’s complement of a an N-bit number defines the most significant bit as signing bit. A zero meaning positive, a one negative. E.g. a signed integer with value 1100 has value -1 * 2^3 + 1 * 2^2 + 0 * 2^1 + 0 * 2^0 = -4
- Data of type char represent one byte. Its numerical value has an ASCII code associated (a-zA-Z0-9 etc.)

## Generics
- C has no templates or generics, so any type-indifferent function should accept pointers of type void. This makes C a fundamentally unsafe language because there’s no checking of these types. The client is expected to have casting and passing of parameters right. This is very sensitive to errors.
- The absence of generics makes function run faster as there’s only one version of the code. With generic functions, during compilation a copy is made for every type that’s used.

## Memory
- C uses functions like malloc, realloc and free to dynamically allocate heap memory (during runtime). It is the client that all dynamically allocated memory is freed. It’s good practice to free memory local to where it’s been allocated
- An application’s memory is divided in different segments, heap, stack and code.
- During a program’s execution, stack memory holds information regarding function calls, mostly local variables, arguments and a reference to previous code address.
- Memory management systems use different methods to optimise memory. E.g. using handles or by using different segments for small and large allocations
- A class object has the same layout in memory as structs. Methods are just regular functions that get a reference to the object’s data in memory as the first argument
- The central memory management unit maps virtual address of memory segments to actual addresses in memory. Address 4000 in an application’s stack memory may map to a large address somewhere in real memory.

## Assembly
- Assembly instructions are held in the code segment of memory. E.g. the assembly instruction to change register 0 to 2 could look like 00000 000 00000010. The first five zeroes are the op code (to change a register). The next three zeroes tell which register to change (R0). The final eight bits specify the number to put into the register (2 in binary)
- When a function is called, its caller adds it arguments to the stack. Then it adds the saved PC (program counter, reference to latest instruction after function call). It then adds any declared local variables. This is called a function’s activation record. Its return value is written to a special register (e.g. RV).
- A reference to the last stack frame is held for access in a special register (e.g. SP). Stack variables are referenced using this register, (e.g. SP-2, meaning two frames above the stack pointer)
- Function arguments are pushed onto the stack from right to left because parameters on the right may be unspecified in the prototype with an ellipsis (…). This is the case for printf. This is so that the leftmost argument is always at the top of the stack in the called function’s frame. Because an unknown number of arguments can be in the argument list, it would be impossible to refer to arguments up in the stack
- Using branch instructions (e.g. BL; Begin execution if Lower then) the PC can jump to different addresses in the code segment. This is how early returns, for loops, etc. are implemented
- The CPU interacts with memory through quick-access 4-byte registers. Assembly instructions load data in memory into registers and stores from registers into memory. Arithmetic on registers is performed by the ALU (arithmetic logic unit).

## Creating an executable
- To create an executable, there are three phases: preprocessing, compilation and linking.
- Preprocessing processes any #define, #include, #ifdef #endif etc statements
- Variables/functions initialised using #define are “search/replaced” by the preprocessor with the instances where they occur in code
- A function declared with #define is called a macro. assert() is a macro.
- Include statements are replaced by the specified file’s contents
- During the compilation phase code is converted into assembly code
- Header files with prototypes inform the compiler the order and type of arguments. Without prototypes, assembly instructions have no information to refer up in the stack.
- The compiler infers the type of function calls if no prototype can be found. It will give a warning.
- During the linking process all compiled object files and standard libraries are combined in one executable

## Debugging
- A segfault (segmentation fault) occurs usually when dereferencing a bad pointer. I.e. an address pointing to memory out of range of a valid memory segment
- A bus error occurs at hardware when a pointer is not at a valid address for its type. E.g. numeric types should always be located at an even address.
- It’s easy to write code in C that creates an infinite loop, e.g. a for loop that writes out of bounds over the the saved PC, decrementing it to point to the previous function call

## Parallel programming
- Multithreading is when multiple threads are executed seemingly in parallel. Execution is delegated to each process sequentially (shortly A, then B, then A, etc.).
- The processor delegates execution to a thread for some time. A thread can be interrupted after any instruction. Most operations are not atomic (i.e. consist of multiple assembly instructions). This is why multithreaded applications should obtain a lock on shared data to ensure validity of operations.
- Example: the processor may interrupt a decrement operation on the second of three assembly instructions (before the value is stored back into memory). The next thread executing may read the value as a 1 still instead of zero.
- Multithreading is useful when there is latency between instructions, such as reading from RAM, I/O, networking etc.
- Multithreading is different from multiprocessing as with multiprocessing processes happen truly in parallel (multiple CPU cores).

## Functional programming
- Functional programming is programming with pure functions. Pure functions produce the same output every time for every input. This means that code that mutates state is not a function (but a procedure).
- Functional programming avoids shared state, mutable data and side-effects. Application state flows through functions, in contrast to state residing in e.g. shared state or objects (OOP)
- Immutability is often used to prevent side effects
- FP uses function composition (declarative) instead of flow control (imperative)
- Functional programming tends to be more concise, more predictable and easier to test than imperative or object oriented code. But it can also be very dense and harder to understand for newcomers.

## Scripting languages
- Scripting languages such as Python evaluate code while it reads it. There’s no relying on compilation such as in C.
- Python combines functional, object oriented and imperative elements
- Many languages use dictionary-like structures underlying classes and objects
- Dynamic languages (non-typed) typically have more runtime errors and are less safe
- Languages such as Haskell may do type inference. This makes the language safer and faster
- Lazy evaluation in a language such as Haskell executes code only when it really has to. For example it may execute code of a map call only when a specific index entry is accessed

